In this lesson, we'll access the database to change user information like the username and password.
You'll see how you can use the database to regain access to a WordPress site if you're locked out.
We'll also learn to troubleshoot plugin conflicts by breaking the site and then fixing it through the
server.
By the end of this video, you'll understand how you can take control of a WordPress site through the
database and troubleshoot even if you can't access the dashboard.
Now that we have access to the database and the files on our sample site here using local, let's play
around with it a little bit more.
Let's go ahead and look at the pages now and in the WordPress dashboard.
We've seen where the sample page content is located here in the WP posts table in the database.
Let's maybe look at a real world scenario that might happen.
Suppose you took over a web site and you didn't have a user account for it?
Maybe the developer had left the the designer.
Maybe you have access to the hosting account, but you don't have user credentials for the website.
If you have access to the database through the hosting account, you can go and modify areas in the
database that would give you access to the WordPress dashboard.
For example, let's go in and look at my user account here under user's profile and look at some of
the things in the profile here.
This is data that would be reflected in the database, of course.
And so there's a few things here that are changeable.
I could have a nickname.
I could display my name publicly.
I could enter a first name and a last name.
As we've seen, the email is a required area of a user account, and there's actually a website listed
here in this one.
And of course, there's a password and you can set a new password here.
Now, an example of not being able to access a user account would be supposing that you know you, you
are on the login page and you use that forgot password link.
But potentially maybe you don't have access to the email address that's associated with that user account
because it's for another person or supposing the outgoing email system isn't working and so you can't
receive a password reset email.
One of the things you can do is access the database in order to solve some of these problems and troubleshoot
so that you can regain access to the WordPress website.
Let's just look at changing something here that's not normally changeable inside of WordPress, and
that is the username you can see right here.
The message that WordPress gives you is that usernames cannot be changed.
And of course, that's true.
They cannot be changed from the WordPress dashboard, but not so when you have access to the database.
Let's take a look at the user's area inside of the database.
Now, if you look through the tables, might be able to find a pretty obvious area.
There's a double up users area and if you click select data now.
Now we've talked about this just a little bit and now we're going to go ahead and change the user name,
the username in WordPress, where it says user names cannot be changed.
So if we're editing the database, let's go ahead and click Edit right here.
The username is called user underscore log in in the WP user's table.
This is a row within the database table and we can go ahead and edit this.
So we are editing the table WP users and we're editing a particular row, the row for the single user
ID number one.
And so the user login, if I just go ahead and change this, maybe I want to change this username to,
you know, something different.
Maybe I'll change it to just anything would work.
How about Greg Davis one?
Instead of Greg Davis?
And now when I hit Save right here, it says Item has been updated.
We made a SQL command in order to change that in the database, and you could see that the user login
name is now Greg Davis one.
And so if I go back to the profile page and just refresh, you can see that because that is the login
name, it's forcing me to log back in.
Now, of course, if I go with the old username and the password, that shouldn't let me log in because
look, it tells me here.
The error message says that the username Greg Davis is not registered on this site, so let's try.
Oops.
Let's try the username.
Then I just changed it to.
Oops!
Greg Davis one.
And the password that I know great now I have access and I'm logged in again with the correct username
here.
Greg Davis one which of course, cannot be changed with WordPress but can be changed in the database.
And now, supposing you needed to change the password, and I've alluded to this a little bit in previous
lessons, but let's go ahead and change the password now.
I know what this password was in my mind.
Let's just, you can, you know, reset the password using this button right here.
You can you can choose one, you can let it generate one and then update the profile and save it here.
But what if you didn't have access and you needed to, you know, regain access and know the password?
As I've said before, this user pass is a hashed or encrypted version of the password inside the database.
And so even if you do have access to the database, you can't gain knowledge of the existing password,
but you can reset the password by editing this row within the WP user's table.
And so let's go ahead and click Edit.
There's one thing you need to be aware of when you reset the user password, and that is when you go
in here and you reset the password.
Let's see.
I'm just going to call it kangaroo one to seven with a capital K..
That's a great password.
And if I go to user pass here and save it without changing this dropdown, then it's not going to work
as a password.
I have to go to MD5, the type of encryption that is used with WordPress, and then I can save.
And now you can see that that user pass field is now just a series of numbers and digits, and it is
not reflected in it's not reflecting the real password.
I do need to remember what that was kangaroo with the capital K one, two seven.
And so now that I've changed that user password, if I refresh the page.
Then it allows it will OG's me out again because it knows that that user had the wrong password.
And so let's go ahead and go Greg Davis one and I'll go to the password field.
Kangaroo.
One, two, seven.
Now WordPress does give you this little eyeball.
You can go ahead and look to make sure you're typing it correctly.
And if I click log in, that logs me in.
So I've changed the password to kangaroo one to seven with a capital K, and I've done that all through
the database.
And so that is a really great way to be able to re access a user account or edit any of the content
areas that you need to.
If there's something that needs to be changed and you can't access the WordPress dashboard for some
reason.
That's a good way to go about it.
Now let's talk about one more real life use case that you might come across and where you can use your
access to the files and the database to help troubleshoot an issue.
And that would be if you have some kind of a plug in conflict or a conflict between a theme and a plug
in.
If you've been able to plug in that has some kind of code conflict, sometimes you can get a critical
error or the white screen where you can't access the website and you can't access the website dashboard
either.
And so let's simulate that and let's fix it by disabling the plug in or even the plug ins folder by
renaming it.
And I'll just show you how this works and you can in your own local environment, if you like, simulate
this as well.
So here in our WordPress dashboard, if you remember, we did install one plugin called a kismet.
And what I've done is in the background.
I let that plug ins screen open.
There it is, and this is an activated plug in.
So it says deactivate here.
So it's an plug in with code that's working on the website.
And if I go into my my folder here, where I have the files for this website and where I've gone is,
you know, in the public folder, under WP content, under plugins, there's the Kismet folder.
And what I'm what I did is just opened the main kismet p p file in my code editor.
And by doing this, I'm just going to simulate a plug in conflict.
We're going to break the website and then fix it again by disabling this plug in.
And so let's simulate a plugin conflict.
So I've opened up a kismet up inside of Adam, and you can see here's the file name in the location.
And as I go in this, this is just one of the files that's part of this plugin.
If I go down to the bottom, I know that I can break this up plug in by just removing one of the semicolons
at the end of any of these lines.
So if I just hit a backspace where that semicolon was and then I hit control s to save, I have basically,
you know, replaced this this whole file with the new file, which doesn't have the required semicolon
right here.
So now if we go back into the website, just go back to the front end of the website.
And if I just go back and press, enter here to go to the same or hit refresh, look what happens.
I've got an error message here and there's a WordPress screen says there's been a critical error on
this website.
This is a place that talks about troubleshooting on the WordPress.org website, but it just tells me
what's going on.
It gives me a little message that it's about, Oh, something's wrong with this plug in online.
Sixty six.
And so one thing I can do if you come across some kind of error like that, especially if you can narrow
it down to a particular plugin.
But even if you can't, you can disable plug ins if you have access to the files at the hosting account.
And so if we go, imagine that our files are now accessible either at the hosting account with a file
manager or using an FTP program, which will go over how to set up in the next few lessons.
But right here, I'm working locally.
So how do I access the files I can go back to, you know, the plug ins WP content folder and under
plug ins?
If if I just rename this plug in folder title to anything besides the name, what it will do, it will
result in that plugin being deactivated on the WordPress site.
And by doing that, that should enable that should enable us to regain access to the dashboard.
Now, before I do that, let's go ahead and just, you know, I had the dashboard open if I were troubleshooting
and maybe I wanted to go to the plug ins page or just go to the dashboard anywhere on the dashboard.
That same error comes up.
So here's an example even navigating to the URL slash WP admin, you know, is not going to work because
of this plugin conflict.
The code is wrong.
There's some kind of mistake that's happening.
And so if you can't?
Access the website and you can access the website dashboard.
One thing you can do is access the files if you have control of the hosting account.
And so here in local on my local computer, that's for all intents and purposes, the hosting account.
It's the server where this WordPress site is installed.
And so I'll have to do like I mentioned, I'll go into the plugins folder and usually what I'll do is
just add rename.
So I know what I'm doing and I can remember if I have to go back in here once I rename this plug in.
And I have that finish, OK, so now that folder has been renamed, I should be able to go back into
the dashboard and re access the website again.
Now this.
There we go.
It opened up.
And if I go into plug ins, installed plug ins, it should give me a message that this plug in is no
longer there.
It's been deactivated due to an error.
The plug in file does not exist.
Of course, it's looking for a plug in folder called it kismet.
However, I renamed it, I renamed it a kismet dash rename.
And so it can't find it.
So WordPress automatically deactivated that plug in.
And I also should be able to navigate to the website and have it working.
It's just that that plug in is no longer activated.
And so one of the things you can do is you can go into the the files and you can access the plugins
folder and you can deactivate your plug ins by renaming them one at a time.
And whichever one causes the website to come back up when you rename it, that is the one that's causing
the problem.
And so this is a really great technique to be able to to troubleshoot WordPress when there are some
code conflicts happening between plugins and themes or between two plugins.
And so if I bring this back and rename it back to kismet, you know, without changing that code, then
it will break the website again.
So you do have to kind of find out what's going on and then potentially delete the plug in and look
for a different solution for what you're trying to do if that plugin conflict continues.
But I think for now, we can just restore it by going back to the file again.
I'm going to put a semicolon and then click control to save, and then I have to go back into the files.
Let's change the name back, and generally that will enable the plugin to be activated again.
It's looking like it's working.
Let's make sure that the front end of the site is working.
Really, I generally don't go into any plug in code and remove semicolons or anything like that.
Now a kismet plug in is working.
I could set it up or manually enter an API key there to make it work.
And so that that gives you an example of how you can go into the file manager or access the files at
your hosting and go into the plug ins folder and rename plug ins to deactivate them even when you don't
have access to the WordPress dashboard.